This course is about h DMO and CSS not javascript but in my opinion a modern web design course is not
doing its job if it doesn't at least familiarize its students with what javascript is used for.
So in this section of the course we will learn how to leverage javascript without writing javascript
.
So what does that mean.
It means that writing javascript code is outside the scope of this course but it also means that you
have enough.
Each DMO and CSSA knowledge to begin adding javascript functionality to your pages.
Right now today and in the process you will learn a bit more about what javascript is what it is used
for and why it will most likely be the next to do item on your things to learn list.
Now instead of spending the next 60 seconds attempting to summarize what javascript is we are just going
to jump straight into our first task.
So in this particular lesson we are going to learn how to set up a slide show in front of you is an
example page that I've set up for this lesson and here we can see the finished product.
This is a slide show so we can see that it transitions between the different slides and if I hover over
it these previous and next buttons appear and if I click them we can rapidly change to the slides.
We also notice pagination or a page or at the top so there are three dots corresponding with the three
different slides and the current or active slide is represented by the black dot.
Now again this is the finished product and staring at a finished product isn't very educational.
We need to start from square one together and work our way up.
So in this tab we can do just that.
This page does not feature a show.
It's simply three images a b a duck and a squirrel all sitting below one another and in terms of HTML
this is nothing more than three instances of the image element.
So how can we transform this into the slide show that we saw just a moment ago.
The recipe has two ingredients.
Number one custom each DML and CSSA which we are fully capable of writing and the second and final ingredient
is a pre-existing javascript solution named Cycle 2 which is written by the brilliant Mike Allsup.
Now in the name of fun let's jump straight to that final ingredient.
Cycle 2.
Now I just downloaded Cycle 2 behind the scenes it's on my desktop here it is.
You can perform a web search for Cycle 2 or you can find this file in the downloadable zip for this
lecture so Cycle 2 comes in the form of a dot js or javascript file.
So our first step after we download the file is to move the file to live with all of our other website
files.
So here is my website folder.
Here's the web page.
Here's our CSSA folder.
Here is our images folder.
I'm going to create a new folder named js which stands for javascript just to stay organized.
Next let's move the cycle to file to live within this new Js folder.
Our next step is to include this file in the header section of our h TNL page just like we would a CSSA
file only the syntax for attaching a javascript file is a bit different.
So we will open a script to tag.
Be sure to close the script tag and in the opening tag we will include an attribute named type.
You will provide a value of text slash javascript.
Let's include a second attribute named source and this is our chance to point the web browser to the
new cycle to file so it lives within the japes folder and its name is cycle to dot.
js So this line of code is complete.
We've successfully add the file to our page.
However the cycle to javascript file has a dependency of Jquery.
Now those are two terms that might not make sense right now.
Dependency and Jquery a dependency simply means that a file relies on a different file in order to run
correctly and Jquery is the world's most popular javascript library.
So in other words we need to include a second javascript file in our page named Jquery.
So behind the scenes I've already downloaded a query to my desktop.
Again you can perform a web search for Jquery or you can find this file in the downloadable zip for
this lecture.
So again we need to move this file to live with our other website files.
And in our head section we can simply duplicate the script line that we just wrote and in the first
line will simply change the name of the file.
So instead of cycle to look for J quarried.
js now that we've added these files to our page cycle to can begin to work its magic by default cycle
2 will actively search on her page.
It will search through our HMO code looking for an element that has a class of cycle slideshow.
If and when it finds an element with that class it will then cycle through the content of that element
.
So for example if we want to create a slide show out of our three images the be the duck and the squirrel
All we need to do is wrap these images in a div in the closing tag let's indent our content stay organized
and give this new div a class of site called slideshow.
So if I save and refresh the web browser we can see that there is now only one image location.
You can see that cycle 2 is doing its job.
So every five seconds or so it cycles between the different contents of the div that we created.
So you can see how it earns its name of cycle.
Now for some of you this is your first time consciously observing javascript that javascript is used
for many things in the modern era but perhaps most famously it's used to manipulate web pages on the
fly without a page refresh.
So in order to create this slideshow effect cycle 2 is manipulating our images on the fly every five
seconds or so.
So for example if I right click on an image and click inspect element Here's the image for the squirrel
.
You can see that it's opacity is currently set to 0 so it's invisible.
But now in the background you see the squirrel is displaying its opacity is set to one so fully visible
and again obviously it's hidden in the background again.
So now it's opacity is 0 and a few seconds here you'll see that now it's opacity is set to 1.
Now we didn't add any of these digital properties that we see here.
For example here's the image for the duck.
You can see that it's receiving position absolute top left z index visibility opacity display.
We didn't add any of that.
The Cycle 2 script is adding those properties on the fly.
And then every five seconds it's manipulating those properties to create the illusion of a slide show
.
Now we don't need to worry about any of this manipulation for the time being.
We're going to let cycle work its magic in the background.
I'm going to close the inspector.
I just wanted to give you a quick idea of what javascript is doing behind the scenes.
And now let's spend the rest of this lesson manipulating the slideshow to look more like the original
example we saw with the previous and next buttons and the pagination dots and the text overlays for
each slide.
So let's hop back over to the slide show that we were creating together.
Here it is.
And let's adjust what we consider a slide.
So currently Cycle 2 is cycling between image elements but we don't want to slide to simply be an image
.
We want a slide to be a combination of an image and a bit of text.
So let's create a div with a class of slide for each slide.
So this div will contain an image and descriptive text.
So there's the image.
Let's create an additional do with a class of slide text.
And this is where we conclude we jump back to the finished product this text.
So a title or maybe a paragraph or one sentence and then some sort of button.
So back to the example that we're working on in this slide text div..
Let's include a heading B title here and then a bit of descriptive text.
This is the caption or descriptive text for the B slide.
So now this slide is a combo of image and text.
So now we just need to create one of these slide divs for the duck and squirrel slides.
Now I won't waste your time by having you watch me do that.
So I'm going to pause the video and then come back.
Welcome back.
So here is the slide.
Here is the duck slide.
And here is the squirrel slide.
So now if we save and refresh we can see that our slide show is completely broken so cycle to no longer
knows how to cycle through our content because by default Cycle 2 wants to search for images not for
divs.
However it is incredibly easy to customize cycle to fit our needs.
So if we scroll up and find the overall parent div that has a class of cycle slideshow we can add an
additional attribute to this div data cycle slides.
Now this is your first time seeing a data attribute now in and of itself.
This attribute doesn't mean anything to the web browser.
However Javascript can access this attribute very easily so Cycle 2 has an option named cycle slides
and we can provide a value which cycle 2 can use.
So this attribute is essentially asking what would you like to cycle through now by default.
Cycle 2 wants to search for any immediate image elements but we can pass it any CSSA style select what
we want.
So period means class and then slide.
So this will tell Cycle 2 to look for any elements that have a class of slide and use them as the slides
.
So for example if instead of Slye we named each one of these divs item then we could change this to
be dot item but obviously we will leave it as slide.
Now if we save and refresh.
First thing I see is that we need a bit of CSSA to come to the rescue very quickly.
So I'm going to hop over to our style sheet.
Create a new comment.
Stay organized Slye to show styles.
So I want to target the slide divs and just make sure that they have a width of 100 percent much better
.
So now we can see that cycle is cycling between the slide does.
So here is the image and the text.
Here is the scroll image and the squirrel text.
So from here we can just apply a bit of custom CSSA to recreate this overlay effect that we see.
So let's hop back over to the slide show that we are working on together and let's write a bit of custom
VSS.
So I want the slides to use position relative because I want to be able to position the slide text div
using position absolute position absolute and I want it to sit at the bottom.
So if I save and refresh you can see that the text is now overlaying the image just like we want.
Let's also give the text area a background color of semi transparent black so we use RGBA instead of
hexadecimal.
So this is black and will give it transparency of about 70 percent.
Let's make the text white.
Let's make sure that this textarea uses the full available width and lets also give it a bit of paddings
or twenty pixels.
Now because the element is using 100 percent width and were also giving it padding I'm going to use
box sizing border box so that the element isn't larger than 100 percent.
If I save and refresh can see we're almost there.
The first thing that I noticed is that the black box is not perfectly aligned with the bottom of the
image or the slide area so we can fix that by making sure that any image elements inside a slide are
set to display.
Block much better and very quickly let's work on the spacing between this title and paragraph text.
Create a new rule slide text target the H-3 element set its margin to 0.
Much better.
Now let's give the slide show itself a bit of bottom margin in our style sheet.
Create a new rule.
Select the overall cycle slideshow element margin bottom 30 pixels so that looked better.
Now there's a bit of space here.
Moving on let's add the previous and next buttons so that users can rapidly click to advance through
this light to enter h t IMHO within the cycle slideshow parent div cycle 2 by default will search for
an element that has a class of cycle hyphen preve And also it will search for an element that has a
class of cycle next.
So let's include a bit of text in these that make sense.
So within the cycle previous element will include text that says previous than this one will include
text that says next.
So if I refresh and click on next you can see I can very rapidly advance through this line.
So now let's just add a bit of custom CSS to style these so that they actually look like user interface
buttons.
So let's hop over to our CSSA file.
Let's create a comment to stay organized.
Preve and next buttons.
So let's begin with the previous button.
It had a class of cycle preve.
So let's position it so that it sits right about here in the slideshow.
So we use position absolute because the overall slideshow element has a value of position relative.
So will say position yourself from the top about 30 percent.
Let's again use a background color of transparent black so RGBA
35 percent.
Make the color of the text white.
Give it a bit of padding so that it's easier to click the button.
If we're giving the element padding let's be sure to make the element block level.
Let's also make the cursor set the pointer so that it looks like a link.
When we hover over it and let's increase the font size a bit.
Finally we will set a z index to a fairly high value so that this UI button is layered on top of the
slides themselves.
If we refresh Here's the button and click it and it works just like we would expect.
Now let's add styles to the next button.
So it is almost identical to the previous button so we actually want to reuse all of these styles for
the next button so I'll simply tack on a new selector for this rule. cycle next.
Now the only thing that we want to be unique about the next button is that we want it to be positioned
to the right.
So what's create a new rule for cycle next.
The only unique property needs is right zero.
If we refresh Now the next button is in place.
Now let's adjust things so that these previous and next buttons only display while we're hovering over
the slide show so we can set their default opacity to zero and then if someone hovers over the overall
slide show so cycle slide show hover then go within and grab the cycle previous button set its opacity
to 1.
Also want to adjust the selector to include cycle next.
So if we refresh we can see they're not visible if we hover over the slideshow.
Now the buttons are visible and we can get a bit fancy if we want.
We can make it so that instead of just appearing and the buttons fade into view so we can see a transition
opacity half of a second
and now over the course of a second.
They fade in and out of view.
Next what if instead of the words previous and next we can include just arrows that point in the left
and right directions.
So in our HMO I will remove previous
and use a symbol that points to the left and never removed next and use a symbol that points to the
right.
So this takes up less space and is a bit more intuitive.